feat(best-iac-2023): add best IaC in 2023 post (#296)
hendriknielaender/double-trouble: data/blog/best-IaC-2023.mdx

---
publishDate: "Oct 14, 2023"
title: "The best IaC tool in 2023"
description: "A fresh look at infrastructure provisioning tools in 2023 and their performance across different categories."
image: "~/assets/images/thumbnails/iac_best_2023.jpg"
imageCreditUrl: https://labs.openai.com/
tags: [terraform, cloud, infrastructure, IaC, ranking, aws, serverless, bun, cdk]
---
import GithubRepoTag from "~/components/atoms/GithubRepoTag.astro";
import InfoText from "~/components/atoms/InfoText.astro";

> The recent release of bun 1.0 still has us all hyped up. The unseen speed of bun, together with a

Reviewer: nit: please add a couple of backlinks to bun, cdk etc.

Author: added links for all tools in the list and also in the intro section!

---

> publishDate: "Oct 14, 2023"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publishDate: "Nov 25, 2023"
```

> title: "The best IaC tool in 2023"

Author: For me this title seems too pretentious and not as true to the content as the original title. Also we dont mention the word "ultimate" anywhere in the post. But I see it might be good for SEO. Do you think this is critical for this post?

> description: "A fresh look at infrastructure provisioning tools in 2023 and their performance across different categories."

Author: seems more like a SEO thing rather than changing the details. I quite like the current description, could we keep that one?

> description: "A fresh look at infrastructure provisioning tools in 2023 and their performance across different categories."

Reviewer: Yes since it's a nit 👍let's keep it

image: "~/assets/images/thumbnails/iac_best_2023.jpg"
imageCreditUrl: https://labs.openai.com/
tags: [terraform, cloud, infrastructure, IaC, ranking, aws, serverless, bun, cdk]
---
import GithubRepoTag from "~/components/atoms/GithubRepoTag.astro";
import RankingTable from "~/components/atoms/RankingTable.astro";

> The recent release of [bun 1.0](https://bun.sh/blog/bun-v1.0) still has us all hyped up. The

Reviewer: nit: more concise

```suggestion
The recent release of [bun 1.0](https://bun.sh/blog/bun-v1.0) has us all hyped up. The
```

Author: Since it is almost 2 months ago lets use the past tense. `still has` -> `had`?

unseen speed of bun, together with a completely overhauled dev experience by unifying the wide
range of tools into one is simply amazing. This new sense of speed and convenience got us thinking
also about other tools - what about IaC?

At the workplace, the choice of IaC tooling is largely determined by company policy, by what is
generally already used and works reasonably well. Through years of evolution and growing maturity,
a hand ful of projects have gained the most popularity: CDK and terraform[^11]. But taking a fresh look
today, what could currently be the best tool in the context of serverless AWS?

> Let's find out and take a look at the best infrastructure tools of the year. We'll evaluate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's find out and explore the best infrastructure tools of the year. We'll evaluate
```

currently available infrastructure as code (IaC) tools, and look at them within certain
categories. This is in a specific context which we believe is relevant today: A lambda function
within an AWS account, which runs ontop of bun.

*All the code related to this comparison can be found in this repository:* <GithubRepoTag text="lambda-iac-2023" repoSlug="flyck/lambda-iac-2023" stargazers="0" issues="0"/>.

## Contenders

> ### Terraform

Reviewer: nit: to give an instant idea about the tool, what do you think? Should we add something like this for all?

```suggestion
### Terraform: The Versatile Veteran
```

Author: Hm very creative but lets keep this simple. Description is in the paragraph and it is short so should be still motivating to read. Also to come up with a catch phrase for each tool might be difficult and inacurate

<GithubRepoTag text="Terraform" repoSlug="hashicorp/terraform" stargazers="39.1k" issues="1.7k"/> is
an IaC tool that allows you to create both cloud and on-premise infrasture, with providers
available for all major clouds (<GithubRepoTag text="terraform AWS provider" stargazers="9k"
issues="3.8k"/>). The code is comprised of the hashicorp language, a custom language for
templating. It supports basic programming features like loops, modules and variables within
certain limits[^6] [^7] [^8] [^9] [^10].

### Open Tofu

> Terraform has recently announced a scary license change, which might restrict the availiability of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a surprising move, Terraform announced a significant license alteration, potentially impacting its future availability and usage. In response, the community has rallied around <GithubRepoTag
text="opentofu" repoSlug="opentofu/opentofu" stargazers="15.3k" issues="119"/>, an open-source initiative poised to preserve Terraform's accessibility and openness.
```

more frequent, and dependencies between resources exist more in lambda code, rather than
infrastructure definitions. While this might not be the whole reason, the observation is that the
whole Cloudformation state handling in serverless seems like a feature that is a little bit of a
surplus. Recently added flags like cdks `--hotswap` and `--no-rollback`show, that a perfect
stack state is no longer the most relevant. Still, if anything in those IaC tools breaks, you will
have to dive deep into the Cloudformation level.

This begs the question if future AWS IaC tools will always depend on Cloudformation, requiring you
as the user to dive into intricacies of that, or if a new methodology will arise. This additional
layer of tooling under the hood is at least something that is already a minor inconvenience,
dealing with serverless infrastructure today. Many infrastructure tools still expect you to dive
into Cloudformation when needed, while wholistic tools that try to hide all abstractions have
failed (Amplify, Beanstalk). It will be interesting to see if this sea of complexity can ever be
bridged.

#### AWS and Speed

> One big takeaway from the comparison is no matter the tool, there will be always limits in terms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A critical insight from our analysis is the inherent speed limitations imposed by AWS's core API calls. Despite advancements in IaC tools, they struggle to match the lightning pace of platforms like bun when interacting with AWS services.
```

while some positive points on the serverless framework (Cui) and the CDK (Stuvy) were made. At the
same time Yan Cui mentioned that the CDK is less popular than he thought, which we can confirm,
while Stuvy said the real winner is CloudFormation. This is true to the extend that most tools use
CloudFormatino under the hood.

Stuvyenberg also points out that in some cases running bun lambdas from a
[container](https://aaronstuyvenberg.com/posts/why-you-should-not-use-lambda-layers) is more
beneficial than with a layer ontop of AL2 and a zip file. At the same time he does also recommend
to run bun via a lambda layer. [Chalice](https://aws.github.io/chalice/index.html) was also listed
in their list of IaC tools, which is yet to be added to our ranking. Definitely give the episode a
listen if you are into bun and serverless!

<iframe style="border-radius:12px" src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/episode/42TzrteyawiNJdaDv85Hse?utm_source=generator&theme=0" width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>

## Rounding up

> Going into writing this post, we had a suspicion that terraform was simply going to be fastest, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we began writing this post, we suspected that Terraform would simply be the fastest, as
```

description: "A fresh look at infrastructure provisioning tools in 2023 and their performance across different categories."
image: "~/assets/images/thumbnails/iac_best_2023.jpg"
imageCreditUrl: https://labs.openai.com/
tags: [terraform, cloud, infrastructure, IaC, ranking, aws, serverless, bun, cdk]
---
import GithubRepoTag from "~/components/atoms/GithubRepoTag.astro";
import InfoText from "~/components/atoms/InfoText.astro";

The recent release of bun 1.0 still has us all hyped up. The unseen speed of bun, together with a

> completely overhauled dev experience by unifying the plethora of tools into one is amazing. This

Reviewer: what? plethora? wide range or variety is more common i guess.
